                      +-----------------------+
                      |  THE HYPERXMP PACKAGE |
                      |                       |
                      |      Scott Pakin      |
                      | scott+hyxmp@pakin.org |
                      +-----------------------+


Description
===========

XMP (eXtensible Metadata Platform) is a mechanism proposed by Adobe
for embedding document metadata within the document itself.  The
metadata are designed to be easy to extract, even by programs that are
oblivious to the document's file format.  Most of Adobe's applications
store XMP metadata when saving files.  Now, with the hyperxmp package,
it is trivial for LaTeX document authors to store XMP metadata in
their documents as well.

hyperxmp integrates seamlessly with hyperref and requires virtually no
modifications to documents that already exploit hyperref's mechanisms
for specifying PDF metadata.  The current version of hyperxmp can
embed the following metadata as XMP: authors, base URL, contact
telephone number/postal address/email address/URL, copyright
statement, creation date, document identifier, document instance
identifier, file format, keywords, language, LaTeX file name, license
URL, metadata writer, PDF version, PDF-generating tool, PDF/A
compliance level and version, primary author's position or title,
subject/summary, and title.  hyperxmp is compatible with pdflatex,
latex+dvips+ps2pdf, latex+dvipdfm, xelatex, and lualatex.


Installation
============

To create hyperxmp.sty simply run "tex hyperxmp.ins".  Install
hyperxmp.sty somewhere where LaTeX can find it.  See
http://www.tex.ac.uk/cgi-bin/texfaq2html?label=instpackages for
general information about installing packages.

Building hyperxmp.pdf is a little more involved:

        pdflatex hyperxmp.dtx
        pdflatex hyperxmp.dtx
        makeindex -s gind-hyxmp.ist hyperxmp.idx -o hyperxmp.ind
        makeindex -s gglo-hyxmp.ist hyperxmp.glo -o hyperxmp.gls
        pdflatex hyperxmp.dtx
        pdflatex hyperxmp.dtx


Copyright and license
=====================

Copyright (C) 2014 Scott Pakin

This file may be distributed and/or modified under the conditions of
the LaTeX Project Public License, either version 1.3c of this license
or (at your option) any later version.  The latest version of this
license is in:

                http://www.latex-project.org/lppl.txt

and version 1.3c or later is part of all distributions of LaTeX
version 2008/05/04 or later.
