                +------------------------------------+
                |              PERLTEX               |
                | By Scott Pakin, scott+pt@pakin.org |
                +------------------------------------+


Description
-----------

PerlTeX is a combination Perl script (perltex.pl) and LaTeX2e style
file (perltex.sty) that, together, give the user the ability to define
LaTeX macros in terms of Perl code.  Once defined, a Perl macro becomes
indistinguishable from any other LaTeX macro.  PerlTeX thereby combines
LaTeX's typesetting power with Perl's programmability.


Installation
------------

In case it's not obvious, you'll need a Perl installation.  Perl is
freely available and runs on dozens of platforms.  See the list of Perl
binary distributions on CPAN (http://www.cpan.org/ports/index.html).

Execute "latex perltex.ins" to generate perltex.sty and perltex.pl.
Install perltex.sty in an appropriate directory (e.g.,
/usr/local/share/texmf/tex/latex/misc or C:\localtexmf\tex\latex\misc).
perltex.pl is a Perl script.  On Unix, you may want to rename it to
just "perltex" and set execute permissions ("chmod +x perltex").  On
Windows, you may want to create a batch-file wrapper for it ("pl2bat
perltex.pl").  In either case, perltex should be installed somewhere in
your executable path (e.g., /usr/local/bin).

It's not necessary to produce the documentation as PerlTeX comes with
prebuilt documentation in PDF format (perltex.pdf).  However, if you
want to build the documentation yourself (e.g., to use A4 paper instead
of U.S. Letter), run "latex perltex.dtx" twice, then "makeindex -s
gind.ist perltex.idx" and "makeindex -s gglo.ist perltex.glo -o
perltex.gls", then "latex perltex.dtx" again, then "dvips perltex.dvi
-o perltex.ps" if you want to produce PostScript.


License
-------

Copyright (C) 2010 Scott Pakin

These files may be distributed and/or modified under the conditions of
the LaTeX Project Public License, either version 1.3c of this license or
(at your option) any later version.  The latest version of this license
is in:

    http://www.latex-project.org/lppl.txt

and version 1.3c or later is part of all distributions of LaTeX version
2006/05/20 or later.
