fonts/concmath --- Concrete Math fonts.

Copyright (C) 1995--99 Ulrik Vieth


COPYING:

This software is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the LaTeX Project Public License
as described in lppl.txt in the base LaTeX distribution; either
version 1 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

This software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


DESCRIPTION:

This directory and its subdirectories are part of the `concmath'
package for LaTeX(2e) that provides access to the Concrete Math
typefaces, which were derived from the Concrete Roman typefaces
designed by Donald E. Knuth.

This directory appears on CTAN archives in two different places:

  CTAN:fonts/concmacth
  CTAN:macros/latex/contrib/supported/concmath/fonts

Whatever it may be, this directory contains two subdirectories
`mf' and `tfm' that hold the Metafont sources and font metrics
of the Concrete Math typefaces.

The Concrete Math fonts provide a collection of math italics,
math symbol, and math extension fonts that complement the
Concrete Roman fonts, so that the Concrete family of typefaces
may be used as a complete replacement for Computer Modern.
(Orginally, Concrete Roman was designed as a text font for use
with the Euler math font, designed by Hermann Zapf.)

Since Concrete is considerably darker than Computer Modern, this
variant may be of particular interest for use in low-resolution
printing or in display-oriented applications such as posters,
transparencies, or online documents.

To access the Concrete Math fonts in LaTeX(2e), you may wish to
consult either the `concmath' package or the `ccfonts' package,
both located in CTAN:macros/latex/contrib/supported.

For further documentation about how the Concrete math fonts were
derived, please read the documentation of the `concmath' package
located in CTAN:macros/latex/contrib/supported/concmath.


INSTALLATION:

- If you have a TDS-compatible TeX installation, you may try to
  use the enclosed `Makefile' by calling:

    make install

- For manual installation, copy the contents of the subdirectories
  `mf' and `tfm' to TEXMF/fonts/{source,tfm}/public/concmath or
  wherever else your installation keeps .mf sources and .tfm files.


Happy TeXing!
