This is the README for the caladea package, version
2014-08-17.

This package provides LaTeX, pdfLaTeX, XeLaTeX and LuaLaTeX
support for the Caladea family of fonts, designed by
Carolina Giovagnoli and Andres Torresi of the Huerta
Tipografica foundry and adopted by Google for ChromeOS as a
font-metric compatible replacement for Cambria.

To install this package on a TDS-compliant
TeX system download the file
"tex-archive"/install/fonts/caladea.tds.zip, where the
preferred URL for "tex-archive" is http://mirror.ctan.org.
Unzip the archive at the root of an appropriate texmf tree,
likely a personal or local tree. If necessary, update the
file-name database (e.g., texhash). Update the font-map
files by enabling the Map file caladea.map.

To use, add

\usepackage{caladea}

to the preamble of your document. This makes Caladea
the default roman family. Options scaled=<number> or
scale=<number> may be used to adjust fontsizes.

Slanted variants are not supported; the designed italic
variants will be automatically substituted. Font encodings
supported are OT1, T1, LY1 and TS1.

Command \caladea is available for localized use.

The original truetype fonts are from

http://gsdview.appspot.com/chromeos-localmirror/distfiles/crosextrafonts-20130214.tar.gz

and are licensed under the Apache License, (version 2.0);
the text may be found in the doc directory. The type1 fonts
were produced by fontforge. The support files were created
using autoinst and are licensed under the terms of the LaTeX
Project Public License. The maintainer of this package is
Bob Tennent (rdt at cs.queensu.ca).
