============================================================
  The DictSym font and the LaTeX macro package dictsym.sty
                         2004-07-26
============================================================
                                              Walter Schmidt
                                      w.a.schmidt(at)gmx.net
                                               

This directory contains the "DictSym" Type1 font designed by
Georg Verweyen and all files required to use it with LaTeX
on the Un*x or PC platform.

The font provides a number of symbols commonly used in
dictionaries.  The accompanying macro package, makes the
symbols accessible as LaTeX commands.

The below installation instructions assume a TDS-compliant
TeX system, such as teTeX, MikTeX or VTeX/Free.  Yet they
may not exactly fit your particular TeX system; please,
consult its documentation, too!  The directory name "texmf"
refers to the root directory of a TDS directory tree.  In
case your TeX systems has more than one such directory tree,
its documentation should tell you where to put new files.



Installing the Type1 font file
------------------------------
Copy the files dictsym.pfb and dictsym.pfm to the directory

  texmf/fonts/type1/public/dictsym

of your TeX system.  (The .pfm file is needed only for
applications other than TeX.)

Copy the file dictsym.afm to:

  texmf/fonts/afm/public/dictsym

Create these directories, if they do not yet exist.



Installing the TeX support files
--------------------------------
Unpack the ZIP archive dictsym.zip in the texmf directory 
of your TeX system; thus, all files will be copied to the
appropriate directories.



Updating the filename database
------------------------------
Many TeX systems require manual updating of a "filename
database" after adding of new files.  Please, consult the
documentation of your TeX system!



Configuring your TeX system
---------------------------
The present distribution comprises several font map files
for the DictSym font.  You need to configure your TeX system
so that these files are actually used.  The required steps
depend on the particular TeX system.  Particular sets of
instructions are provided below for the following systems:

  * teTeX
  * VTeX/Free

With other TeX systems such as MikTeX, consult the related
documentation how to install an additional font map file.
The name of the map file to be used for the DictSym font is
"dictsym.map".  Two copies of this file reside in the
directories texmf/dvips/config and texmf/fonts/map/dvips.

Configuring teTeX
-----------------
Additional font map files (here dictsym.map) are installed
using the shell script "updmap".  With teTeX-2.0 and later
(or teTeX-beta as of June 2002 and later) execute the
following commands:

  texhash
  updmap --enable Map dictsym.map

With earlier versions of teTeX, consult its documentation
about how to add new map files to the system.

Configuring VTeX/Free (v8.44 and above)
---------------------------------------
Make VTeX read the additional font map ("aliasing") file
dictsym.ali.  This is usually accomplished by putting an
appropriate record ito each of the configuration files

  texmf/vtex/config/pdf.fm
and
  texmf/vtex/config/ps.fm

The name "dictsym.ali" is to be added to the TYPE1 section
of the above-mentioned files:

TYPE1 {
  ...
  dictsym.ali
  }
  


Using the DictSym font with LaTeX
---------------------------------
See the file dictsym.pdf.  (Unpacking of the archive, as
described above, creates a further copy of this file in the
the directory texmf/doc/latex/dictsym of your TeX system.)



Legal notice
------------
The font "DictSym" is made up from the files dictsym.pfb,
dictsym.afm and dictsym.pfm  These files are subject to the
following conditions of use and distribution:

  Copyright (c) 2004 Georg Verweyen

  This work may be distributed and/or modified under the
  conditions of the LaTeX Project Public License, either
  version 1.3 of this license or (at your option) any later
  version.  The latest version of this license is in
  http://www.latex-project.org/lppl.txt and version 1.3 or
  later is part of all distributions of LaTeX version
  2003/12/01 or later.

  This work has the LPPL maintenance status "maintained".

  This Current Maintainer of this work is 
  Georg Verweyen" <Georg.Verweyen(at)WEB.DE>

The "dictsym" macro package and the related documentation
file dictsym.tex are subject to the following conditions of
use and distribution:
 
  Copyright (c) 2004 Walter Schmidt
  
  This work may be distributed and/or modified under the
  conditions of the LaTeX Project Public License, either
  version 1.3 of this license or (at your option) any later
  version.  The latest version of this license is in
  http://www.latex-project.org/lppl.txt and version 1.3 or
  later is part of all distributions of LaTeX version
  2003/12/01 or later.

  This work has the LPPL maintenance status "maintained".

  This Current Maintainer of this work is 
  Walter Schmidt <w.a.schmidt(at)gmx.net>



Credits
-------
Special thanks to Rolf Niepraschk for his help with creating
and testing the font.

== finis
