This is the README for the roboto package, version
2014-08-12.

This package provides LaTeX, pdfLaTeX, XeLaTeX and LuaLaTeX
support for the Roboto, RobotoCondensed and RobotoSlab
families of fonts, designed by Christian Robertson for
Google, who says:

  Roboto has a dual nature. It has a mechanical skeleton
  and the forms are largely geometric. At the same time,
  the font features friendly and open curves. While some
  grotesks distort their letterforms to force a rigid
  rhythm, Roboto doesn't compromise, allowing letters to be
  settled into their natural width. This makes for a more
  natural reading rhythm more commonly found in humanist and
  serif types.

In addition to some condensed variants, there are four
weights in a slab-serif family.

To install this package on a TDS-compliant
TeX system download the file
"tex-archive"/install/fonts/roboto.tds.zip, where the
preferred URL for "tex-archive" is http://mirror.ctan.org.
Unzip the archive at the root of an appropriate texmf tree,
likely a personal or local tree. If necessary, update the
file-name database (e.g., texhash). Update the font-map
files by enabling the Map file roboto.map.

To use, add

\usepackage{roboto}

to the preamble of your document. This makes Roboto the
default sans family. To also set Roboto as the main text
font, use

\usepackage[sfdefault]{roboto}

LuaLaTeX and xeLaTeX users who might prefer type1 fonts or
who wish to avoid fontspec may use the type1 option.

Other options include:

regular
bold
medium        
black
light
thin

These are implemented by defining macros recognized
by commands defined in the mweights package (without
re-defining \bfdefault or \mddefault).

condensed       

Only light, regular and bold weights are available in the
condensed family.

Defaults are regular and bold (uncondensed). 

Italics (slanted) are available in all variants.

rm

This option activates the slab-serif variants as the main
text font. The weights available are thin, light, regular
and bold, but there are no italics.

Options scaled=<number> or scale=<number> may be used to
adjust the sans fontsizes to match a serifed font.

The only figure style supported is tabular-lining. Font
encodings supported are OT1, T1, LY1 and TS1.

Commands \roboto, \robotocondensed, and \robotoslab select
the Roboto, RobotoCondensed, and RobotoSlab font family,
respectively.

The original fonts are available at
http://www.google.com/webfonts and are licensed under the
Apache License, (version 2); the text may be found in
the doc directory. The type1 versions were created using
fontforge. The support files were created using autoinst and
are licensed under the terms of the LaTeX Project Public
License. The maintainer of this package is Bob Tennent (rdt
at cs.queensu.ca)
