===========================================================
                 "Bera" font pack for LaTeX
                      as of 2004-09-30
============================================================
                                               Malte Rosenau
                                              Walter Schmidt
                                               

This collection comprises the "Bera" Type1 fonts and the
files required to use them with LaTeX on the Un*x or PC
platform.

"Bera" is a set of three PostScript Type1 font families:
Bera Serif (a slab-serif Roman), Bera Sans (a Frutiger
descendant), and Bera Mono (monospaced/typewriter).  The
fonts were originally designed by Bitstream, Inc in TrueType
format under the name "Bitstream Vera".  These fonts are
available from <http://ftp.gnome.org/pub/GNOME/sources/
ttf-bitstream-vera/1.10/>.

Malte Rosenau converted the Vera fonts to the Postscript
type1 format; the license required a different name ("Bera")
to be assigend to the result.  Ulrich Dirr (Art & Satz)
reworked the kerning tables of the Bera Sans fonts.

The file bera.pdf shows samples of the Bera fonts and lists 
all available families, series and shapes.

The below installation instructions assume a TDS-compliant
TeX system, such as teTeX, MikTeX or VTeX/Free.  Yet they
may not exactly fit your particular TeX system; please,
consult its documentation, too!  The directory name "texmf"
refers to the root directory of a TDS directory tree.  In
case your TeX systems has more than one TDS tree, its
documentation should tell you where to install new files.



History
-------
2004-09-30
  bugs in the kerning tables of BeraSans fixed
  
2004-09-07
  substantially improved kerning data for Bera Sans
  (special thanks to Ulrich Dirr!);
  minor fixes to the kerning data of Bera Serif;
  miinor changes to the substititions in the fd files;
  minor changes to the documentation;
  font sample;
  
2004-01-31
  preliminary release



Installing the Type1 font files
-------------------------------
The Type1 font files 

  fveb8a.pfb
  fver8a.pfb
  fvmb8a.pfb
  fvmbo8a.pfb
  fvmr8a.pfb
  fvmro8a.pfb
  fvsb8a.pfb
  fvsbo8a.pfb
  fvsr8a.pfb
  fvsro8a.pfb

are to be copied to the directory

  texmf/fonts/type1/public/bera

of your TeX system, and the related .afm files should go
into

  texmf/fonts/afm/public/bera

Most likely, you will have to create these directories
first.



Installing the TeX support files from the archive bera.zip
----------------------------------------------------------
Unpack the ZIP archive bera.zip in the directory "texmf" of
your TeX system; thus, all files will be copied to the
appropriate directories.



Updating the filename database
------------------------------
Many TeX systems require manual updating of a "filename
database" after adding of new files.  Please, consult the
documentation of your TeX system!



Configuring your TeX system
---------------------------
The required actions depend on the particular TeX system.
Particular sets of instructions are provided below for

          * teTeX 2.0 and later,
          * VTeX/Free 8.x and later.

In case you have a different TeX system, consult its
documentation how to make it use the additional font map
file named "bera.map".  Two copies of this file reside in
the directories texmf/dvips/config/ and
texmf/fonts/map/dvips.

Configuring teTeX:
Use the shell script "updmap" to add the font map file named
"bera.map" to the configuration.  See the documentation of
your particular teTeX version how to use the script.  With
teTeX 2.0 and above, execute the following commands:

  texhash
  updmap --enable Map bera.map


Configuring VTeX/Free:
Make VTeX read the additional font map ("aliasing") file
bera.ali.  This is usually accomplished by putting a record
for this file into each of the configuration files

  texmf/vtex/config/pdf.fm
and
  texmf/vtex/config/ps.fm

"bera.ali" is to be added to the TYPE1 section of the
above-mentioned files:

  TYPE1 {
    ...
    bera.ali
    }



Using the Bera fonts with LaTeX
-------------------------------
See the file bera.txt, which resides in the directory
texmf/doc/fonts/bera.



Bugs and problems
-----------------
With older versions of the dvips program, font subsetting
may fail with the Bera fonts.  In this case, disable
subsetting through the dvips option "-j0", or change the 
font map file bera.map accordingly.

The Type1 fonts exhibit a font-specific encoding, rather
than the usual "Adobe Standard".  While this is irrelevant
for TeX, it may lead to problems with applications from the
non-TeX world.  In case you encounter any such problem,
please report to 
Malte Rosenau <malte.rosenau@theol.uni-goettingen.de>.

Any bugs regarding the TeX metrics (including the kerning
data), fd files and macros should be reported to 
WalterSchmidt <w.a.schmidt@gmx.net>.


Legal notice
------------
The license terms for the Bera fonts are included in
the file LICENSE.  

The contents of the archive file bera.zip are

  Copyright (c) 2004 Walter Schmidt

The files may be distributed (either as a ZIP archive or
unpacked) and/or modified under the conditions of the LaTeX
Project Public License, either version 1.2 of this license
or (at your option) any later version.  The latest version
of this license is in http://www.latex-project.org/lppl.txt
and version 1.2 or later is part of all distributions of
LaTeX version 1999/12/01 or later.

  
== finis
