Version 1.0 of drm, submitted to CTAN on 1 Sept
2014.

Version 1.1 of drm, submitted to CTAN on Friday, 4 Sept
2014, was a bugfix release.  Primarily, it corrected very
minor errors in the roman W and V, and some slightly larger
unsightliness in the roman OE ligature and in the roman r,
which got seriously distorted in bold and at larger sizes.
Also put the old-style numerals into the italic fonts, where
for some reason it was forgotten except for size 10.
Finally, there were some potential namespace issues with the
more generically named files (e.g., oe.mf), kindly pointed
out to me by Karl Berry, which should now be resolved.  Due
to some errors in packaging, this version was uploaded again
the next day, but the version number was not incremented.

Version 2.0 of drm, submitted to CTAN on Wed., 10 Sept 2014,
was a major release.  New bold-extended italic and upright
italic, new italic/slanted small and titling caps, new bold
extended small and titling caps, redesigned italic shapes
for "k" and "u" (little visual difference, but better
parameter-wise), improved accents placements for lowercase
letters in all italic fonts, improved accent placement in
small and titling caps.

Version 2.1, submitted to CTAN on 19 September 2014, simply
added "<<" and ">>" as ligatures producing guillemets and
fixed some kerning issues.  It also fixed the widths on the
figures in the boldface italic fonts.

Version 2.2, submitted to CTAN on 24 September 2014,
contained some significant changes.  Some kerning fixes; the
introduction of a short-tailed "Q" in the roman fonts,
accessed via \drmshortq; and the introduction of superior
and inferior figures, the former being the default (unless
|nodefault| or |notextdefault| is selected) for footnote
numbering.  Did the usual kerning tweaks.  Finally, I
fixed the acute and grave accents, which in a number of
cases were inexplicably backwards.

Version 3.0, submitted to CTAN on 1 October 2014, 
is a major revision; glyphs and metrics are unchanged, but
the fonts are now available as Postscript Type 1 fonts now,
being selected automatically by using the "typeone" package
option.  We also have some tidied-up math glyphs and a set
of macros for typesetting *decorative initials* and
*enumerate labels* (and other things) using the gmp package
and Metapost.
