		FONT GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE EXCEPTIONS
		       Version 1, October 1998

 Copyright (C) 1998 Kristoffer H. Rose <krisrose@tug.org>

 Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
 of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

			       Preamble

  Software for typesetting frequently includes fonts of characters.
If this software is covered by the GNU General Public License, then a
document, created as a result of running the software, which also
contains the fonts (for example for presentation purposes), is a
"derived" work.  This license grants specific rights to separately
distribute fonts in order to make it clear that documents containing
the fonts (with the purpose of printing and viewing the characters and
images depicted in the document) are permitted.

		    Exception Terms and Conditions

  0. This License applies to any font or other work which contains a
notice placed by the copyright holder saying it may be distributed
under the terms of the GNU General Public License, either version 2 or
a later version, below the "License", with the explicit mention that
the exceptions of this Font General Public License Exceptions, below
the "Exceptions", apply.

The "Font", below, refers to just the single file that has the
explicit mention that these Exceptions apply.

All other terms used are those of the License.

  1. You may distribute any unmodified version of the Font without the
requirement that the full remaining source of the Program is enclosed.

An intact copy of the Font file with the same name, insofar as the
environment where the file is stored permits this, is considered as an
unmodified version.

  2. You may distribute files with the Font translated to another
format provided that the following two conditions are met:

    a) The name of the Font, if it appears, must remain the same or be
    as close to the original name as the format permits.

    b) You accompany the file by a prominent notice about the lack of
    warranty for the Font as detailed in the GPL.

  3. You may include fragments of the Font, or of the Font translated
to another format, in documents or other work with the purpose of
making it possible to view or print the document, provided that you
accompany the document with a prominent notice about the lack of
warranty of any kind for the Font, as detailed in the GPL.

		End of Exception Terms and Conditions

	Appendix: How to Apply These Terms to Your New Fonts

  If you develop a new font or an icon as part of a program, and you
want it to be of the greatest possible use to the public, the best way
to achieve this is to make it free software which everyone can
redistribute and change under these terms.  However, in order to avoid
encumbering the use of your font in printable and viewable formats,
you may want to include this exception notice with it.

  To do so, attach the following notices to the font source file.  It
is safest to attach them to the start of the source file to most
effectively convey the exclusion of warranty; and each file should
have at least the "copyright" line and a pointer to where the full
notice is found.

    <one line to give the font's name and a brief idea of what it does.>
    Copyright (C) yyyy  <name of author>

    This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
    the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
    (at your option) any later version.

    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
    GNU General Public License for more details.

    You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
    along with this program; if not, see http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

    Special permission is granted to distribute this font separately
    under the terms of the Font General License Exceptions enclosed
    with this program.
    
Otherwise follow the instructions in the appendix of the GNU General Public
License.
